The Project Gutenberg eBook of Scrambled Eggs
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Scrambled Eggs

Author: Lawton Mackall

Illustrator: Oliver Herford

Release date: November 13, 2024 [eBook #74733]

Language: English

Original publication: Cincinnati: Steward & Kidd Company

Credits: David Edwards and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCRAMBLED EGGS ***





                            SCRAMBLED EGGS

                           By LAWTON MACKALL

                         With illustrations by
                            OLIVER HERFORD

                              CINCINNATI
                        STEWART & KIDD COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS

                          COPYRIGHT, 1920, BY
                        STEWART & KIDD COMPANY
                         _All Rights Reserved_
                         Copyright in England

                                  TO
                             Orson Lowell
                           DELIGHTFULEST OF
                                FRIENDS




                               CONTENTS


                            SCRAMBLED EGGS

                            HIS COOP IN ORDER

                            BEYOND THE PALING

                            THE JUGGERNAUT




                                   I

                            SCRAMBLED EGGS


Eustace was a thorough gentleman. There was candor in his quack, and
affability in his waddle; and underneath his snowy down beat a pure and
sympathetic heart. In short, he was a most exemplary duck.

Or rather, to be more correct, a drake: for he was a husband, and the
proud father of several eggs.

He admired his wife tremendously. "Gertrude," he said to her one day,
as he squatted beside the nest in his burdock home, "you are certainly
a wonderful female to have laid those eggs. I can't tell you how I
respect you for what you have done."

"That's all very well," she replied, preening herself coolly, "but I
notice you never offer to sit on them."

[Illustration: _"That's all very well," she replied, preening, "but I
notice you never offer to sit on them."_]

Eustace was taken aback. "Surely you wouldn't expect me to do that!" he
said.

"I don't see why not. I've been sitting here for over two weeks, and
now it seems only fair that you should take your turn."

"But, my dear duckling," he protested, "it would never do! It would
look unmanly. Think how Clarence would crow over me!"

"That's it!" she said scornfully. "That's the way it is with you
drakes! You haven't the spunk to do what you ought to, for fear some
old libertine of a rooster will make fun of you!"

"But, darling ..."

"Oh you males! You expect a female to give up everything for
motherhood, and yet you aren't willing, or are afraid, to do anything
to make her life endurable!"

"But I should think you would be happy, with such beautiful eggs as
these," he ventured in a conciliatory tone. "Look at Martha: _she_
seems quite blissful over hers, and yet they aren't nearly as large or
as white."

This allusion had just the wrong effect. "Now don't try to set up that
stupid hen as an example for me!" she snapped indignantly. "All her
life she's done nothing but lay eggs and sit on them. And what is the
result?--she hasn't an idea under her comb, no, not even sense enough
to know that Clarence is carrying on disgracefully with other chickens."

Eustace, feeling uncomfortable, tried to interpose a pacifying remark,
but she did not give him a chance.

"It's females like that who have kept our sex in subjection. But _I'm_
not one of them, let me tell you. I believe in a communal incubator."

"Yes, dear,--such a thing might be very convenient, if it were once
established,--though I fear it would lack the personal touch. But for
the time being, since there isn't any communal incubator, your duty is
to sit on your eggs."

"My duty! How about my duty to myself? Don't you suppose that my nature
demands any higher fulfillment than this?" Rustling her feathers
petulantly, she got up.

"Stop!" he cried. "You shall not desert our eggs! I have acceded to
your other modernisms--your coop-reform theories, your sex-education
for ducklings; I have even come out openly for the single standard of
morality;--but this thing I will not tolerate."

"You'd like me to be an insipid nestwarmer like Martha, wouldn't you?
Well, I won't, now. I intend to know life!" And, with a defiant waggle
of her tail, she departed, to undertake research in distant puddles.

Eustace felt stunned. He was so dazed that he allowed a luscious black
beetle, that crawled past within easy range, to proceed on its way
ungobbled. Poor, forlorn eggs, he thought, children of an unnatural
mother, they were too young to realize that they had been forsaken!

Pity overcame his pride: he sidled over and sat on them. They felt
rather cosy and comforting, pressing thus snugly against his paternal
breast. He spread out his feathers lovingly.

He would sit here for a while, he thought, as he craned his neck this
way and that to be sure that no one was looking,--yes, he would sit
here till Gertrude returned, and then he would do what he could to
make things up again. After all, there was a good deal in what she had
said. She _had_ had a hard time, sitting still for so many days, and he
ought to be willing to....

"Er-ur-er-ur-errr!" crowed an insolent voice, startlingly near by.

Clarence! Eustace hopped off the eggs as though they were live coals.
Hastily snapping up something from the ground, he began gulping
it assiduously, with much show of hunger. But his success was not
great, for it was a rubber washer and proved to be more pliable than
swallowable.

Clarence came swaggering up with, "Hello, Eustace, old game bird! Say,
did you see a good-looking blonde pullet go past here?"

Eustace laid down the washer and answered stiffly, "No."

"Well, you needn't act so sanctimoniously about it," said the rooster
with a leer. "You may fool your wife with your righteous air, but you
can't gull me!" He gave Eustace a sly dig in the wishbone.

"Clarence," said the other with dignity, "there are some things which,
I fear, we shall never regard in the same light."

The rooster burst into a jeering gurgle, flapping his wings with
merriment. "Oh, I forgot,--you're one of those single standard cranks.
Well, no wonder you're henpecked!" Just then he caught sight of the
nest. "Been sitting on the eggs, like a well-trained husband?"

"No. Certainly not!" stammered Eustace, overcome with mortification.

Clarence, not to be hoodwinked with such a feeble denial, only
chortled the more scoffingly. He would have continued his gibes but
for the sudden appearance of the blonde pullet. "Ah, there she is!" he
exclaimed abruptly, and strutted off after her.

The frame of mind in which Eustace now found himself was not a pleasant
one. "I suppose the old scoundrel will tell everybody he caught me
sitting on the eggs!" he reflected. "And how those gossipy Guinea
fowls will carry on when they hear it!" He picked up the washer again
and chewed it malevolently--_nyap, nyap, nyap, nyap--ulp!_--out it
flipped. Oh, what was the use of anything anyhow? Casting one look at
the eggs that had been the innocent authors of his undoing, he waddled
sadly away and buried his dejected head in the depths of the frog-pond.

When, several hours later, he returned home, he found Gertrude already
there. She was in the best of spirits. "What do you think," she said
breathlessly, "my theories are working out!"

But he hardly heard her. He was staring blankly at the nest. It was
empty. The beautiful white eggs were gone.

"What have you done with our poor unhatched children?" he gasped.

"Nothing," she replied calmly. "I was just going to tell you: they have
been taken to the communal incubator."

"What!--Who took them?"

"I don't know."

"Then how do you know where they are gone?"

"By intuition, you stupid. How else should you expect me to know?--It
just _had_ to come. I've been predicting it all along."

"I only hope nothing serious has happened to them," he said earnestly.

"Nonsense!" she replied. Then she went on triumphantly: "Think what it
will mean for them. They will be hatched scientifically, eugenically.
And when our little girls grow up--for some of them may be girls--they
will be _free women_; they will enjoy the happiness of motherhood
without its drudgery."

Eustace did not share her enthusiasm. He felt anxious and lonesome.

       *       *       *       *       *

A week later, the whole barnyard was agog with the news that Martha had
hatched out a brood of ducklings.

Gertrude veiled her disappointment over there being really no communal
incubator, by remarking sarcastically to her husband, "Well, a
hot-nurse is the next best thing, and Martha makes an excellent one.
It's all she's capable of."

"But do you think people will understand?" asked Eustace uneasily.

"All who keep abreast of the times will."

But gossip was rife. The Guinea hens started it, jabbering most
scurrilously; the geese prated of it to the turkeys, who held up their
feathers in genteel horror at the thought of such a scandal; and a pair
of puritanical doves, looking down disapprovingly from a high gable,
puffed themselves out with self-righteousness and murmured thanks be to
heaven that they had always kept aloof from everybody else.

When the news reached Clarence, he left off flirting with his newest
affinity and stalked home in a towering rage. He found Martha sitting
on a batch of eggs, while round about her pattered the furry little
ducklings.

"Faithless wife!" he cried. "Go! Never let me see your beak again! And
take your web-footed brats with you!"

The hen was in a pitiable flutter of distress. "I am innocent," she
clucked. "I have been true to you. I really don't know _how_ it
happened."

"Hah! Do you expect me to believe that, you English sparrow?"

"Revile me and peck me, if you have stopped loving me,--but, oh, don't
drive me away from my eggs."

"Go!" he reiterated, shaking his comb at her. "You're not fit to have
the custody of them!"

The poor flustered thing got up, all atremble. She called despondently
to her foster children, who toddled after her as she departed.

"Now for that villain of a drake!" thought Clarence, and he set out in
search of Eustace.

The father of the ducklings was at that moment in the middle of the
pond, regaling himself upon a lucky find of frog's-egg tapioca. As he
swallowed the succulent globules his neck writhed in contortions of joy.

"Hah! you guzzling hypocrite! you hawk in dove's clothing!" cried a
voice.

Eustace looked up. There on the bank was Clarence, pacing to and fro in
a fury.

"Come out on shore, you sleek betrayer, you whited sepulcher!"

The full terror of his situation dawned on him. Here was he, despite
his conscientious integrity, accused of a most heinous sin,--and,
worst of all, accused by Clarence!

Interested spectators began to assemble on the bank. Eustace became a
center of attention. And the rooster continued to rail and threaten.

"Oh, if I could only get at you!--you with your single standard!"

That was a bombshell. "Shut your bill, you liar!" shouted Eustace, as,
with a vigorous kick of his foot, he wheeled away from the tapioca and
started for the shore.

Gertrude, arriving on the scene with a flying scuttle, beheld her hero
paddling resolutely to land. How proud she was to see him face that
big prize-fighter! But, determined that they should not come to blows,
she rushed up behind Clarence and honked in his ear: "_I_ laid those
eggs, you blustering fool. Martha only _sat_ on them. She would sit on
anything."

"What--what's that?" asked the startled rooster.

"Martha would sit on _anything_," repeated the Amazon. "I can prove
it.--Stand back, Eustace!--Here she comes now. I'll make her sit on
that stone." She indicated a smooth white pebble that was somewhat oval
in shape.

As she spoke, the forlorn hen drew near, followed by the ducklings.
They trailed along after her like a train of guilt.

"Shameless creature!" muttered Clarence.

But she, keeping her eyes dejectedly on the ground, did not notice him,
nor anyone else.

Gertrude stationed herself by the pebble. As Martha passed by, she
said, in a tone of politeness, "Pardon me, but you dropped an egg."

Martha stopped. "Oh, did I?" she said gratefully. "Thank you, thank you
for telling me. I'm so bewildered I hardly know what I'm doing--Ah, the
poor little thing is all cold!" she added, sitting compassionately upon
the pebble; while, unobserved by her, the ducklings tobogganed down the
bank into the water.

Gertrude eyed the rooster witheringly. "Whom are you going to fight
with about _this_ egg?" she demanded.

"Well, I'll be fricasseed!" said Clarence. Then he turned to the
drake. "Eustace, I apologize. And I don't mind saying that you have a
remarkably clever wife."

"She's the most wonderful female in feathers!" assented Eustace
fervently.

"However," added the rooster, "there are compensations about having a
dull one." For among the crowd of onlookers his eye had just fallen
upon a little bantam lady whom he had never seen before.




                                  II

                           HIS COOP IN ORDER


If there was one thing that the sympathetic heart of Eustace could not
endure, it was the spectacle of abused virtue.

"Gertrude," quacked he thoughtfully to his help-meet, as they were
cruising one day on the frog-pond, "I am really distressed about
Martha. Her husband is acting shamelessly."

Gertrude shrugged her wings. "Well, what else could you expect?" she
said. "The silly hen has brought it all on herself by being so humble
and simpleminded."

"I'm afraid she has," admitted Eustace. "And that is the sad part about
it; for she's really such a fine female--so unselfish, so devoted to
her nest."

"Yes, and such a fool. She's never taken any care of her personal
appearance, or tried to be Clarence's intellectual companion; and now,
when she's getting old (she must be nearly five) and has lost the
figure she had when she was a pullet, it's no wonder that she bores
him. You can't expect to hold a rooster's affections with a mere egg
record."

"I suppose you're right. And yet I'm awfully sorry for her. It's common
talk at the haystack that he has just added another affinity to the
three he had already."

"What! Do you mean that bold-faced speckled creature who was uncrated
only two days ago?"

"Yes."

"The hussy! She tried yesterday to shoulder me away from the
refreshment can, right before everybody; but I gave her a look that let
her know I was ready to tweak her comb off, and she thought better of
it."

"I'll warrant she did!" assented Eustace admiringly. He knew Gertrude
could take care of herself in any situation. "But what can we do about
poor Martha?"

"Nothing that I can see. I confess I have quite lost interest in her
since she refused to attend our conference on Free Puddles for the
Public. But as for that brazen-beaked speckled thing, the next time
I...."

[Illustration: "_She refused to attend our conference on Free Puddles
for the Public._"]

"But, darling, don't you think it is our duty, as citizens, to
rescue Martha from the shame of her present position? We mustn't act
pharisaically toward her, the way the swans do, just because she is
afraid of the water and can't walk gracefully. It isn't right to evade
the issue by saying, 'Oh, what better morality could you expect among
chickens?' No; it is for us of the white-feathered race to uplift and
enlighten those of the colored-feathered race, so that when Death comes
chopping at our neck, we shall have amounted to something in this
barnyard."

Gertrude was softened. "I believe you're right," she said, after a
pause. "You have such a noble, high-minded way of looking at things!
Yes, you had better go to Clarence and talk this over with him, fowl to
fowl, and make him realize the great wrong he is committing."

"I've tried it already--several times. But it's no use. He only laughs,
and says that as long as Martha puts up with his ways he has no
intention of changing them. So the only thing to be done is for you to
go to see Martha and...."

"_I_ go to see Martha?"

"Yes--as a friend."

"She's no friend of mine! I'll never forget the way she acted when I
invited her to that meeting. When I said to her that it was the duty of
every one to attend, she had the effrontery to tell me, very pointedly,
that a _female's place was on the nest_."

"Yes, yes, I know, dear. Yet I should think that, just this once, you
might...."

"No, I won't. She'd as likely as not say something insulting about my
quacking in public."

"Very well, then," said Eustace in an aggrieved tone. "_I_'ll go talk
to her."

"You will? And what will you say to her?"

"I don't know exactly; but I'll try to bring her to a full realization
of the position she's in, and then...."

"_That_ will please her, I'm sure," said Gertrude ironically. "Yet I
doubt if you get that far. She's so blind, she probably believes him
to be as innocent as an egg, and, therefore, won't hear a word against
him."

"Gertrude," he replied with dignity, "I am sorry that your prejudices
have biased your mind to such an extent. However, I shall,
notwithstanding, do what I can to redress this poor hen's wrongs, by
encouraging her to defend her rights and to make her husband respect
her."

"Why, certainly. Don't let me deter you. If you think you can make a
modern female out of a feathered incubator, then by all means go and
try it."

"I shall," he said confidently.

Quitting the pond with a bold waggle of his tail (would that human
beings could thus shake themselves free of all that lies behind them!),
he wriggled sturdily up the bank, and started off for Martha's nest
with a magnificent seagoing waddle.

He found the hen sitting on a large brood of eggs. "Good afternoon," he
said, bobbing his neck affably.

"Good afternoon," she echoed colorlessly.

"I have come to talk with you as a friend," he began, lowering his
voice to an earnest tone, "about something that weighs very deeply on
my heart."

She looked at him with a dull, nonplussed expression.

"You see," he continued, becoming a little nervous, "--h'm--where is
your husband?"

Martha drew herself up in modest alarm. "Sir," she said, "I don't know
where my husband is at this moment; but if what you have to say can't
be said whether he is present or not, then I don't wish to hear it at
all."

"I beg your pardon," stammered Eustace hastily. "You misunderstood me.
It is about him that I wished to speak. I--I merely wanted to say that
you have my sincerest sympathy, and that I am ready to do all I can to
help you redress your wrongs."

"Your sympathy? Help me redress my wrongs?" she exclaimed, divided
between astonishment and perturbation. "What do you mean?"

"Madam," he replied with knightly gallantry, "I respect you for
endeavoring to shield your husband. But my admiration for you only
makes me regret the more his--er--his neglect of you."

"My husband neglect me!" Ruffling up still more, she glanced for
reassurance at her eggs.

"I refer--since you compel me to speak bluntly--to his attentions to
other females."

"Sir, you forget yourself! How dare you say such things to me!" She
burst into tears.

Eustace was taken aback. "Why, really, I...."

"The best husband in all the barnyard!" she sobbed, wiping her eyes
on a leaf. "So loving to me every time I see him!" Then, in a sudden
cackle of rage, she cried, "Leave me, miscreant! With all your guile,
you will never be able to alienate my affections from him!"

That was enough for Eustace. He went.

Gertrude was unable to elicit from him any very definite account of
this interview, but from his disgruntled taciturnity and from one or
two things which he let slip, she made her own inferences as to what
had taken place. "It never pays to offer your sympathy unless you know
it's wanted," she observed sagely. "Remember the time you tried to
console Mrs. Swan for her children's not being white."

But the next day it was her turn to be astonished. As she and Eustace
were trimming the shrubs in front of their burdock home, who should
appear but Martha, with disheveled feathers and a woe-be-gone look.

At sight of her Eustace lost any rancor that had lingered in his breast
from yesterday. "What is the matter?" he asked solicitously, as he
hurried forward to meet her.

"Oh dear, oh dear!" gasped Martha hysterically. "Forgive me for what I
said to you--the things you told me have proved only too true!" Here
she broke down entirely.

Eustace, unaccustomed to such displays of emotion on the part of the
weaker sex, turned an S. O. S. glance in the direction of Gertrude; but
she, keeping scornfully aloof, ignored this call for assistance.

"After you left me," continued the hen, when she was able to regain her
speech, "I couldn't help thinking over what you had said, and dreadful
suspicions began to enter my mind, so that last night I didn't sleep at
all. My head tossed and squirmed under my wing all night long."

Again she broke down, and Eustace felt more helpless than ever.

"When Clarence came to see me to-day, I asked him some pointed
questions. He tried to evade them and change the subject, by
complimenting me on having just laid another egg. But I could see he
was hiding something, and when he went away I got up from my nest and
followed him. As I turned the corner of that clump of bushes over
yonder, I saw ... I saw my husband--in the act of embracing ... a
speckled female!" Uttering these last words, she keeled over, and would
have fallen had not Eustace stayed her with his outstretched pinion.

"Bring some smelling-roots!" he called excitedly. "Quick, some garlic!"

When the hen had been restored to consciousness, she thanked Eustace
and his wife most humbly, and said, "I have come to you because you
offered to help me. Tell me what I must do."

"Get a divorce," said Gertrude firmly.

"Oh no, no!" exclaimed the hen. "I couldn't live without Clarence. What
I want is to have him all to myself."

At this confession of weakness, Gertrude, raising her bill in air in
token of supreme disgust, waddled off to the pond, to attend a regatta
of water-bugs.

But Eustace, believing that Martha's whole happiness was at stake,
faced the matter seriously. He felt that this was a golden opportunity
for doing her good. "You must make your husband respect you and feel
the need of your companionship," he said. "You must share all his
interests. If he has a passion for hunting which leads him to stalk
grasshoppers or go coursing after a pack of beetles, then _you_ must
take up hunting and join in his sport. If, on the other hand, he has a
hobby for collecting, and goes about picking up pieces of old china,
then you, also, must become a connoisseur in antiques."

As the hen listened to this advice, she blinked in a befuddled manner.
"But what would become of my eggs?" she asked.

"Oh, I don't mean that you are to absent yourself from your home when
maternal duties require your presence there. Far from it. You are to
reign there as queen of his heart, enthroned on your nest."

Martha sighed wistfully.

"Even at those times when the cares of motherhood keep you within
the coop," he went on, carried away with his theme, "you can still
make yourself your husband's intellectual companion, by discussing
with him such topics as the political betterment of the barnyard,
the abolition of capital punishment for obesity, the restriction of
overcrowding in bee tenements, and the regulation of food distribution
by the Pan-Gastronomic Association. From talking over these things with
you, he will learn the value of your opinion, and will come to find
continual inspiration in your society."

The hen listened in awed silence. At last, heartened by his eloquence,
she said, "I'll try to be that kind of wife. It will be hard at first,
but perhaps I'll get used to it."

Accordingly, the next time Clarence came strutting up to her, with
swishing feathers and a gurgle of "Hello, wifie dear!" she answered
serenely, "How do you do, Clarence? I want to have a talk with you."

"Huh!" said he in surprise. Drawing himself up and holding one foot
meditatively in the air, he cocked his head sidewise to have a good
look at her.

"I have been thinking things over very seriously," she continued, in
the same tone, "and from now on I intend to be a very different sort of
wife to you. In the past I have not shared your interests as I should
have; but in future I shall make myself your companion in everything. I
shall keep informed on all topics of the day, such as the organization
of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Insects and the report
of the Vice Commission on conditions in the rabbit pen, so as to be
able to discuss them with you and give you the benefit of my opinions."

"Say, what's the matter with you?" he demanded. "I'll be plucked if I
ever saw you this way before!"

Emboldened by having disconcerted him, she went on to make good her
advantage. "And after this I shall always...."

"Sorry, but I'll have to be going. Have an important engagement." He
started to move away.

"With whom?"

Startled at the audacity of her question, he inquired ill-humoredly,
"Why do you ask?"

"Because I am your wife, and, therefore, take an interest in everything
you do."

"You do, do you?" He looked her square in the profile, then lowered his
head and pecked thoughtfully at a weed; then he said, "Well, since you
are so curious to know--I'm going cricketing with Jim, the turkey."

"Then I'll go with you. You and I together can catch them twice as fast
as he can."

"Look here, now--this is no hen party!" he rasped.

"I'm not so sure," she retorted, stirred more and more by jealous
suspicions. "It may be a speckled hen party!"

Clarence gave an involuntary start. Then, falling into a quivering
rage, he clawed the ground with fury. "Just for _that_, now, it _shall_
be a speckled hen party! Good-bye!"

"Wait a moment, Clarence!" she called abjectly, as he stalked away.
"Ah, don't leave me!"

"Green-eyed termagant!" he gargled, as a parting thrust, and headed
straight for the clump of bushes where waited his affinity.

Two days later, when Eustace was expressing to Gertrude his
gratification over having converted Martha to modernism, he was
suddenly struck dumb by the appearance of the hen herself. That
disconsolate female, with every feather ruffled the wrong way, had
a shaky manner and a wild look in her eye that gave promise of an
unpleasant scene.

"Why, what is the matter?" he inquired nervously, as she drew near and
fixed her glance upon him.

"A pretty question for you to ask, you breaker-up of homes!" Eustace
took a step backward.

"Monster!--to poison my mind against my husband! I hope you're
satisfied, now that you've wrecked my happiness!"

At this point, Gertrude, who had witnessed Martha's first outburst with
scornful composure, thought it time to intervene. "Come, come--control
yourself!" she said sternly. "Now tell me what's the matter. Have you
had a quarrel with Clarence?"

"Yes," gulped the hen. "Your husband made me do it."

"Why, I...."

"Keep quiet, Eustace! Let me manage her. Did he go away and leave you?"

The hen nodded.

"And he hasn't been back since?"

She shook her head.

"And now you want him to come back?"

"Oh yes--_yes_!" she moaned. "I'll let him have his way in everything,
and never leave my nest, and never ask any more questions!"

"Hear that, Eustace?"

He did, in blank silence.

"Then go repeat it to Clarence, and bring him here at once," she
commanded.

He hesitated, and was about to speak.

"Don't stop to talk. Hurry!"

He did as he was told.

Swinging sharply around the corner of the clump of bushes, he collided
with the very fowl he was seeking.

"Why, hullo, old Single Standard!" exclaimed the rooster jocularly.
"Whither hurried hence?"

"Ah! I'm glad I've found you," said Eustace earnestly. "Martha, your
wife, is in great distress of mind. She wants you to come home, and
promises she'll never ask any more questions."

"Really? Then you're my friend for life!" As they started off together,
he continued, "You'll have to forgive me, old sport--I didn't see it at
first, but you certainly were far-sighted to put her up to that 'modern
female' nonsense. The truth is, until you did this I was afraid she
might some day get on to me, and that I'd never hear the end of it;
but now, since she's learned her lesson, I'll have her right where I
want her. She knows she can't afford to ruffle the only rooster in the
barnyard."

They walked on for a while in silence. Eustace, toddling dazedly, could
find no utterance for the thoughts in his mind.

"You know," said Clarence reflectively, "I'll be glad to see Martha
again. I'm getting a bit tired of that speckled minx. She's beginning
to nag me with 'Why do you love me?' and 'How much do you love me?'
questions."

"Clarence," said Eustace, finding speech at last, "I had a very
different purpose in mind when I counseled Martha as I did."

The rooster cocked his head quizzically. "So you wanted to reform my
coophold, did you?"

"Yes," answered Eustace, in deep earnest.

Clarence exploded into a prolonged guffaw. "Whoopee!" he gurgled,
stamping around and shaking his feathers. "Say, old bird, you've got
lovely ideas, all right--but you don't understand _hens_. You're
_quaxotic_."




                                  III

                           BEYOND THE PALING


Eustace waddled stanchly in the path of virtue. Despite the ill success
of his attempt to set Clarence's coop in order, he still pursued his
crusade against plural doting.

The unregenerate rooster continued to chaff him.

"Ah there, old top-knot!" Clarence would gurgle. "How's our bright
little uplifter to-day? Still busily uplifting?"

But the thrust that got Eustace in the pin feathers was:

"I know why you're such a model drake,--it's because your wife is the
only duckess in the barnyard."

"Not at all!" he replied. "The principles for which I stand are
absolute. They would be the same if there were a hundred duckesses
besides Gertrude!"

"Even a hundred _pretty_ ones?"

"Certainly!"

Clarence chuckled.

"For all your noble principles, I wouldn't trust you with a wooden
decoy! No, old angel-wings, I.... Look! as I live, a bewitching
broiler! What elegantly slender drumsticks she has! I'll have to make
her acquaintance."

Forgetting all about Eustace, he scrambled out of the woodpile (where
this conversation was held), and stalked forward jauntily to meet the
new arrival.

"Are you looking for anyone?" he inquired gallantly.

"No, I'm a stranger. I just arrived by the latest crate."

"Ah, I see. So you're one of this week's débutantes.--Then may I have
the honor of showing you about?"

"You're very kind."

And off they strolled down the alley of tin cans known as Lover's Lane.

Eustace watched them sadly.

"So young and tender!" he thought. "Such chick-like innocence!" The
wickedness of the world appalled him.

Hearing an unfamiliar voice, he looked up. Like a queenly galleon
swaying from side to side, there approached a snowy, rounded whiteness.
The paddling feet seemed scarcely to leave the ground. A golden-webbed
goddess!

Eustace was spellbound.

She, all unconscious, continued to approach, caroling little toot-like
honks. There was a soft rasp in her voice that thrilled him to the
gizzard.

Seeing Eustace, she paused. Their eyes met. Then, with a pretty turn of
her head, she looked at him out of the other eye.

"Who are you?" he said, as though in a dream.

"I am Phyllis," she answered simply.

"What a beautiful name!"

"And yours?"

"Eustace."

After a moment of silence, he asked:

"Where did you come from?"

She sighed.

"From a far-distant barnyard. I was kidnapped."

"Kidnapped!"

"Yes, snatched away from my mother and sisters."

"But was there no one to defend you?"

She shook her tail mournfully. A glistening tear coursed down her
lovely beak.

"There, little bird, don't cry!" he said sympathetically, smoothing
down her soft feathers.

"I was subjected to the most cruel indignities," she murmured.... "I,
who had always been treated with particular care and regaled with
special dishes of mush!"

"Oh!" he exclaimed, his blood boiling at the thought, "If only I had
been there!" He clenched his pinions.

Smiling gratefully amid her tears, she quacked:

"You are very comforting."

Eustace's heart beat faster.

"I was lonely and homesick," she continued, "but your sympathy makes me
forget everything."

"Phyllis!"

His crop heaved.

"Now I am not even sorry!"

"Really? Do you really mean that?"

"Yes. For in that other barnyard there were no drakes as high-minded
and chivalrous as you."

High-minded! Chivalrous! How those words singed him! Dazedly he awoke
from his wild dream.

"I ... I am not what you think I am," he stammered,
conscience-stricken. "I am unworthy. I forgot myself. Forgive me ...
I ... I am a married bird!"

And he fled, wobbling rather than waddling, from her presence.

In the solitude of the dim crypt under the veranda he pondered over
what had happened. He was contrite, humbled, thoroughly ashamed of
himself. As he listened to the ominous rumble of rocking chairs
overhead, he felt that the Powers Above knew and were displeased.

And yet he could not free himself from the spell of the enchantress.
Her image haunted him,--the dark eyes and radiant bill, the softly
undulating neck, the downy complexion, the beautifully-rounded form,
the feet that tapered exquisitely toward the heel....

Oppressed by the consciousness of sin, and, at the same time, inflamed
by his guilty infatuation, Eustace could not endure being alone a
moment longer. He decided to go home. It would be hard to look Gertrude
in the beak ... but he would have to; for he needed her spiritual
influence. Communion with her strong nature would calm him.

Toddling home moodily, he arrived just as his wife was on the point of
leaving.

"Where are you going?" he said.

(How _bony_ she looked to-day!)

"To the mass meeting at the haystack."

"What mass meeting?"

"You don't mean to tell me you've forgotten!"

"Oh, I remember now. This is the day of your rally." But she was not
satisfied.

"I must say, you take a fine interest in my work!" she exclaimed
caustically. "Why, you act as though you didn't care whether I raised
the funds for that laying-in hospital or not!"

"I _do_, dear. But to-day ... I ... I don't feel well. I have a
headache."

"I'm sorry.--But hurry and come along, or you'll be late."

The thought of facing that gabbling assemblage was revolting to him.

"I don't think I'll go."

"What!"

"I believe I'll stay home.--I came here to have a talk with you,
Gertrude. I need your spiritual help."

"I'm awfully sorry, then, that you didn't come a little sooner,--for
you know how glad I always am to discuss anything that is on your mind.
If you had only...."

"But couldn't you stay with me just a _little_ while?"

"My dear Eustace, you seem to forget that I have to _preside_ at
that meeting. How could I stay with you? Besides, this whole idea
of endowing a free nest-box is mine, and I intend to see it carried
through."

She started off.

"But, Gertrude ..." he protested.

She paused, with an expression of impatience, and said:

"Oh, well, I'll be late, then. What is it?"

"Gertrude ... I just wanted to talk with you ... and be with you.
I...."

"Do hurry!"

The words stuck in his gullet.

"Well, I can't wait here all day, you know!"

"Gertrude ..."

"Sorry, but I'll have to see you some other time. Good-bye!" And she
hastened away to her meeting.

Eustace gazed after her stonily.

"You might have saved me--if you had cared!"

He had craned out to her for help, and she had deliberately sidled away
from him.

"Hah!" he quacked bitterly. "What difference does it make! What does
anything matter! Hah! I flap my wings at the world!"

He was becoming a queer duck.

Casting one farewell look at his home, he fled. Beyond the outermost
paling of the barnyard he went, on into the uncharted wilds of the cow
pasture. He waddled blindly.

As he entered a grove of cat-tails, there was a stifled quack. A
snowy apparition started up from the couch of reeds where it had been
squatting.

"You!" cried Eustace.

She returned his gaze mutely.

"How ... how did you get here?" he asked.

"The cold-heartedness I met with was more than I could bear. It drove
me out. Even you, the only living fowl who spoke to me ... even you...."

"Ah, can't you understand!"

"Yes, I understand ... only too well. Let's not talk of it.--Tell me,
how is it that _you_ are here?"

"I, too, am an exile."

"What! Why, I heard you spoken of as a great leader, almost a prophet."

"All that is past!" he said in soul-agony. "I go to become a hermit."

"But your wife?"

"I shall never see her again."

There was a tense silence. Phyllis, avoiding his look, toyed nervously
with a leaf. At last, stiffening up his neck with as much firmness as
he could muster, Eustace said:

"Good-bye."

She raised her lovely profile and was about to quack, when he burst
out, croaking with emotion:

"Ah, Phyllis, Phyllis! I have said a last farewell to nest, wife,
career,--but I cannot say it to you! You hold me as with a magic spell.
Love--tempestuous, convention-defying--has swept me off my webs."

"I, too, have...."

She buried her head, in confusion, under her wing.

"Phyllis!"

He covered her beautiful amber wax-cherry lips with kisses.

After a while she murmured:

"We'll be exiles together, won't we, dear."

"Yes, my duckie. We'll paddle out on the pond of love sidebone by
sidebone. We'll seek some friendly wild where we may build our nest,
far from the madding cackle."

"Yes; in a land of milk-weed and honeysuckle."

"My swan! My nightingale! My dove!"

"My kingbird!"

Lifted from earth on wings of ecstacy, Eustace recited:

    "A nook of rushes underneath the bough,
    A bug or twain, or toothsome frog--and thou
      Beside me quacking in the wilderness,--
    O, wilderness were paradise enow!"

Phyllis sighed.

"But come!" said Eustace eagerly. "Let us fly to that wilderness!"

"Yes, let us fly!"

Gathering up her feathers, she waddled with him out into the great
unknown.

Before they had traveled a distance of twenty leaves, they heard
an awful sound. A gigantic Being, under whose terrible feet great
twig-logs snapped like straws, came crashing through the jungle. In an
instant he was upon them.

Eustace, disregarding his own peril, spread out his wings to shield
Phyllis. But she, lacking the valor of a drake, ducked.

O fatal flop! In less time than the twitching of a tail the awful
Being pounced down, seized her by her lily-white neck, and bore her,
shrieking, away; while Eustace, following frenziedly, exhausted himself
in futile cries. At sight of the execution block, his honks became
hysterical.

The hatchet gleamed aloft. He turned away and closed his eyes. The
sound of the blow went through him like a spit. Sick at heart, he
staggered away, hardly aware that he was back in the barnyard.

"The good-to-eat die young!" he cried in anguish.

O the irony of life! Why should she be cut off in her prime, and he, a
hardened sinner, be spared? Miserable bird that he was, why should he
be left to linger on uselessly in the world?

"Mr. Eustace!" ventured a timid voice.

Looking up, he saw a bright little red-combed cockerel.

"Oh, sir," said the cockerel deferentially, "I've been searching for
you everywhere."

His sweet ingenuousness was very appealing.

"You have? Why, what can I do for you?" said Eustace, softened.

"Please, sir, I'm secretary of the Young Peepers' League, and we
want to know if you'll be kind enough to give us a talk tomorrow on
'Character Building'".

[Illustration: "_Please, sir, I'm secretary of the Young Peepers'
League._"]

What!--_he_, the weak and sinful wretch, the....

"Please say you will!" pleaded the cockerel. "It'll mean so much to us.
You know, we all look up to you so!"

A feeling of balm stole into Eustace's breast.

"I will," he answered humbly, strumming the little chap's comb.

The young fowl thanked him, and then skipped away happily.

"Bless his little giblets!" sighed Eustace.

From that moment everything seemed more cheerful. The ground looked
weedier, the pond looked greener, the watering trough looked leakier,
the sleepy hollows of the dirt-bathing resort looked dustier, and the
sky more like rain.

There was still work to be done, there were still ideals to be striven
for.

Feeling once more himself--no, not quite his old self, for the fire
through which he had just passed had burned into his soul--he went home
to make peace with Gertrude.

She was waiting for him. Standing in front of a salmon-can cheval
glass, she was anxiously massaging the wrinkles under her eyes. She had
heard that there was a new duckess in the barnyard.

"Well, dear!" she exclaimed with unwonted cordiality; and then launched
into a nervous babble of demonstrativeness.

Eustace let her chatter on. He was in too serious a mood to listen to
her. Deep and solemn thoughts filled his mind.

"Vanity of vanities!" he reflected. "The paths of glory lead but to the
gravy."

[Illustration: "_The good-to-eat die young. The paths of glory lead but
to the gravy._"]




                                  IV

                            THE JUGGERNAUT


Eustace had grown old. He was nearly seven, and a widower. Hardships
had seared and toughened him; so that the dread of a culinary fate,
which lurks in the breasts of softer-constituted fowls, no longer beset
him.

What did cause him distress, however, was the worldliness of the
younger generation. Their aims were deplorably low. They went about
seeking only the things of earth. Crass, superficial, they were
satisfied with merely scratching the surface. And the fowl with the
greatest following was ever he that bore the biggest morsel of food.

Even the land had changed for the worse. The large tract which enclosed
the barnyard--that gorgeous Natural Park, scene of many a happy
vacation tour, where grew stately thistles and forests of majestic
weeds--had, after a disgusting orgy of fertilizer, degenerated into a
sordid, monotonous, soul-less field of wheat.

Saddened by all this, Eustace plead earnestly but vainly with his
fellow fowls, entreating them to moult themselves of evil. But they
would not. They merely shrugged their wings and called him "the old
hoot owl." But he--their taunts rolling off him like water--ceased not
to warn them; for he knew that some terrible visitation must be in
store.

One day it came. Along the far edge of the field moved a grim red
Monster, overwhelming and ravening the wheat in its path. It had
a great black-and-white pinion with which it swept the ground
destroyingly; uttering the while a gruesome roar, like the grinding of
huge teeth.

At sight of it Eustace was aghast. (He happened to be meditating in the
solitude of the wheat stalks.) Scudding home madly, he panted:

"Look! See what has come upon us!"

The turkey, official observer for the community, stretched his tall
periscope neck and studied the situation critically.

"Pooh!" he said. "The thing's gone past."

Then he settled down comfortably in a dust bath.

Soon, however, one of the well-groomed pigeons lolling on the veranda
of their pole-top club house, condescended to inform the rabble below
that the Unpleasantness had not really gone, and would be visible again
in a few moments, even to _them_.

"But of course," added the pigeon, smoothing an unruly quill, "what
goes on in the underworld is of small interest to us."

[Illustration: "_But, of course," added the pigeon, "what goes on in
the underworld is of small interest to us._"]

Eustace was shocked at the callousness of High Society.

"I just wish _they'd_ had to grub for a living!" he said indignantly,
and then resumed his task of spreading the alarm.

An old deaf gander to whom he was obliged to repeat the story three
times, offered the sage comment:

"Indeed! I suppose this may complicate our foreign relations. But I am
too old and too much of a philosopher to allow myself to be disturbed
by it. Those fowls whose duty it is to attend to such matters will
no doubt do so. For myself,"--(he paused in contemplation of an
unwarily-ambient bug)--"for myself, I have learned to take things as
they come."

Saying which, the philosopher reached out solemnly and consumed the
erring one.

Martha, unable to appear because of her confinement, clucked virtuously
from within the coop:

"Well, I'm glad to say I've never bothered my head over things that
don't concern me!"

Clarence took the matter more seriously.

"Man broil it!" he swore. "This may spoil my chief place of
assignation!"

But the attitude of the community as a whole was voiced by the Guinea
fowls, who said:

"How intensely interesting! We'd love to have you tell us more about
it. But the dinner pan has just sounded, so we can't stay. Awfully
sorry."

And so Eustace found himself a second Cassandra.

With horror he watched the Monster approaching. It was at that moment
quite a distance away, but, because of the peculiar conformation of
the wheat patch, it happened to be headed straight in the direction of
the barnyard.

"Defend your nests!" he cried.

Not a bird heeded him.

"I think the meals here are getting awfully skimpy," remarked one hen
to another.

"Indeed they are. I almost wish I'd stayed at home and gotten a pick-up
lunch. Still, we can go over after this to the cold buffet at the pig
pen."

At one side of the social gathering Clarence was chatting with the
turkey.

"Come on, let's get over here out of this mob of hen-folks. They get on
one's nerves sometimes.--Have a chew of spear-weed?"

"Thanks."

"Say. Heard a good one the other day. There was a young pullet who had
never laid an egg, and she...."

"Heavens!" cried Eustace. "How _can_ you joke at a time like this!"

They eyed him curiously.

"So you take even your _dinner_ solemnly?" drawled Clarence.

The gobbler threw back his head and guffawed till he was purple in the
face.

"You know very well what I mean," retorted Eustace. "_What are you
going to do about that Monster?_"

"Why ... _you_ feed it."

"Yes," chimed in the turkey. "You're always so kind-hearted, and like
to set us an example of charity and that sort of thing. This is just
your chance."

"Ah, do be serious! Don't you _hear_ the horrible thing?"

"Certainly I do. I hear lots of unpleasant things without getting
wrought up about them."

"But this is something we've got to face!--Listen to me, fellow
denizens," he said, raising his voice and addressing a group who were
just settling down for their post-prandial siesta. "The enemy is
drawing nearer every moment! If you doubt my words, come up on this
mound and see for yourselves."

A few, who had curiosity, did so.

"Dear me! I'm glad it's way out there instead of here!"

"But can't you see that it's _coming_ here?"

And so it was. Gradually this fact dawned upon one fowl after another,
till all were in commotion.

"Well, what would you have us do about this Monster of yours?" demanded
a hen querulously. She felt that since Eustace had, so to speak,
flaunted the objectionable thing in their faces, it was for him to get
them rid of it.

"I would suggest, madam, that you retire to a place of security. We
males will defend you."

Then going again to the rooster and the turkey, he said:

"Clarence, you had better take command. You know more about fighting
than any of the rest of us."

"Very well," replied the rooster without enthusiasm. "But I'm not much
at this military business. All my fighting experience has been in the
line of duels--just formal affairs between bird and bird for the sake
of ladies' favors--and I can't say I'm very keen for a proposition like
_this_. But Jim, here, ought to be able to make an impression on it:
he's the most formidable blusterer going."

"I'm afraid you overrate me," said the turkey hastily. "I--er--I'm
willing, of course, to do my share in any general plan that may be
decided on. But I should not advise you to count on me too heavily,
for, while I am able to maintain a bold front and a resolute tail
against such light skirmishers as cats, lapdogs, babies, and so forth,
I could hardly cope with this modern machinery of destruction."

Meanwhile the Monster continued its ever-diminishing spirals. Its
proximity appeared particularly menacing on the side of the barnyard
which was unprotected by a fence. Here Clarence, at the earnest
suggestion of Eustace, drew up all the males who would respond to his
call for volunteers. Most of them were afraid. Their beaks chattered.

Behind them a hysterical crowd of females shrieked, cackled, and
plucked their disheveled feathers. Wives and morganatic mates, who in
the past had been ready to peck each other's eyes out, now wept on
each other's wing in sympathy. Hens who had always been most careful
of their reputations, cried: "Oh, my Clarence!" One poor thing was so
overcome that she laid an egg before assistance could be brought her.

Through the midst of this frantic crowd Bertram, the swan, pinioned his
way, remarking coolly:

"I see no reason for becoming excited. The Monster won't go into the
_pond_. Any bird's perfectly safe _there_."

"But we can't swim!"

"Then you should have learned. Come, Gwendolyn; let us withdraw from
this unseemly confusion."

And together the swans swept down the bank into the water.

"They all think only of themselves!" thought Eustace sadly.

"Hurry, Johnnie! Don't stop to peck at that!" called a Guinea hen to
the straggler of her brood. "See how far ahead of us Papa is!"

"What! Surely you're not _deserting_!" cried the drake.

None of the Guinea caravan paused to answer, but set out across the
field as fast as they could scoot.

"Go!" shouted Eustace after them. "Fly to the wilderness, Gypsies,
renegades! We have no need of cowards!"

The gobbler, too, was filled with exasperation as he watched the
spryness of the keet family.

"Confound it!" he muttered under his comb-appendage. "Why aren't _our_
youngsters hatched and in traveling condition!"

Eustace did not hear. He heard and saw only the oncoming Monster, which
had ravaged all the wheat save a last slender strip, and this it was
in the act of devouring; and as if this slight morsel could not glut
its hunger, it reached out voraciously into the barnyard. All fowldom
seemed about to be destroyed.

"_Now_, Clarence!"

The rooster started forward, then hesitated.

"Then follow me!"

Disregarding the fear he could not subdue, Eustace flung himself
desperately in front of the Thing, quacking:

"Halt! You shall not...."

And he aimed at it the fiercest bite of which he was capable.

Gashed, bleeding, dying, he lay at the edge of the barnyard.

"The Thing has gone!" cried somebird.

"Eustace drove it away!"

"Look! See it slink off without making a sound! Its wing is broken!"

In truth the Monster, having laid low all the wheat in the field, was
now retreating to its lair with steelly pinion bent up.

"He has saved us!"

They rushed to him and tried to bind up his wounds.

"Thanks," he said weakly.

Reverently, with tear-dimmed eyes they crowded about him, ministering.

"Thank you, good friends. But your cares are of no avail. My time has
come."

"Don't say that, old bird!" protested Clarence huskily. "We need you
too badly! No; you're going to live and be the leader of this barnyard."

The drake shook his head feebly.

"Yes, indeed! You're going to have every honor we can give you! Why,
man roast me!--you're the bravest bird that ever was! You've got the
real stuffing in you! When I think of the way you showed us as a bunch
of yellow-legged white-feathers, I realize I'm not fit to scratch worms
for you.--And so here, before everybody, I resign my job as leader
right now."

"No, Clarence; they depend on you. And I must pass on."

The rooster turned away to hide his emotion,--he was crying like a
chick.

"Ah, do not leave us!" pleaded a sweet-faced adolescent. "All of us
young fowls look to you for guidance."

Eustace smiled with peaceful tenderness.

"Bless you! You are all my children!"

At which a hen who had the unfortunate habit of taking things
literally, exclaimed:

"What's that?"

But luckily Eustace did not hear her. Still addressing his neophytes,
he said:

"And you will remember the things I have taught you?"

"Yes, yes! We've resolved that when we grow up we'll be just the sort
of birds you'd have us. And I've made up my mind never to have but one
wife, and I'm going to win her with my spurs in the open tournament,
like a true knight."

One after another, the young fowls told Eustace of the ideals he had
implanted in them,--how they would respect henhood, remember the
stranger within the crates, hold their crops up resolutely, and never
stoop to anything unworthy, even if it looked edible.

Hearing these assurances, Eustace was very happy. An expression of
blessed calm o'erspread his bill.

"Now I can go in peace," he murmured. And, after a little: "My eyes are
becoming dimmer. I can hardly see your faces.--But now I am beginning
to have a glimpse of that Land Beyond. Oh, it is wonderful!"

"He is having a vision!" they whispered.

"I see streets of opalescent mud, and lovely gardens teeming with
delectable insects, and crystal fountains full of goldfish, and puddles
everywhere. I see little radiant-feathered chickibim.

"And there is Gertrude! She is wearing a golden top-knot, and her
quacking is above the music of a thousand nightingales.--She is calling
to me!... Yes, Gertrude, I am paddling over the river to you!"

Eustace tried to rise, made an ecstatic movement with one web, then
fell back lifeless.

All remained silent.

At last the rooster, clearing his throat with an effort, said:

"Friends, we have lost a great prophet, a martyr, the savior of the
whole barnyard. He was the paragon of poultry: throughout his life he
was impeckable."





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SCRAMBLED EGGS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

